units/en/unit3/2.md, before:

# Direct Preference Optimization (DPO)

Direct Preference Optimization (DPO) revolutionizes preference alignment by providing a simpler, more stable alternative to Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF). Instead of training separate reward models and using complex reinforcement learning algorithms, DPO directly optimizes language models using human preference data.

## Understanding DPO

![dpo diagram](https://github.com/huggingface/trl/assets/49240599/9150fac6-3d88-4ca2-8ec6-2a6f3473216d)

Traditional RLHF approaches require multiple components and training stages. As the diagram shows, it involves:
- Training a reward model to predict human preferences based on preferred and rejected responses.
- Using reinforcement learning algorithms like PPO to optimize the policy against the reward model.

DPO simplifies this process dramatically by skipping the reward model and using a binary cross-entropy loss to directly optimize the language model.
- First, training a SFT model to follow instructions.
- Then, training a DPO model to directly optimize the language model using preference data itself.

<Tip>

DPO has proven so effective that it's been used to train production models like Meta's Llama series and many other state-of-the-art language models.

</Tip>

## How DPO Works

DPO recasts preference alignment as a classification problem. Given a prompt and two responses (one preferred, one rejected), DPO trains the model to increase the likelihood of the preferred response while decreasing the likelihood of the rejected response.

### Training Process

The DPO process requires supervised fine-tuning (SFT) to adapt the model to the target domain. This creates a foundation for preference learning by training on standard instruction-following datasets. The model learns basic task completion while maintaining its general capabilities.

Next comes preference learning, where the model is trained on pairs of outputs - one preferred and one non-preferred. The preference pairs help the model understand which responses better align with human values and expectations.

The core innovation of DPO lies in its direct optimization approach. Rather than training a separate reward model, DPO uses a binary cross-entropy loss to directly update the model weights based on preference data. This streamlined process makes training more stable and efficient while achieving comparable or better results than traditional RLHF.

### The DPO Loss Function

The core innovation of DPO lies in its loss function, which directly optimizes the policy (language model) using preference data:

```
L_DPO = -E[(π,r)~D] [log σ(β log π_θ(y_w|x)/π_ref(y_w|x) - β log π_θ(y_l|x)/π_ref(y_l|x))]
```

Where:
- `π_θ` is the model being trained
- `π_ref` is the reference model (usually the SFT model)
- `y_w` is the preferred (winning) response
- `y_l` is the rejected (losing) response
- `β` is a temperature parameter controlling optimization strength
- `σ` is the sigmoid function

## DPO Dataset Format

DPO training requires preference datasets where each example contains:

| Field | Description | Example |
|-------|-------------|---------|
| `prompt` | The input prompt or question | "Explain quantum computing in simple terms" |
| `chosen` | The preferred response | "Quantum computing uses quantum mechanics principles..." |
| `rejected` | The less preferred response | "Quantum computing is very complex and hard to understand..." |

The dataset can also include additional features to enhance training quality. It can include system prompts that provide instructions for the model's behavior. It can also incorporate multi-turn conversations that involve complex dialogues with preference annotations. Finally, it can contain metadata providing additional context like preference strength or annotator agreement.

We can see an example of a DPO dataset below:

<iframe
  src="https://huggingface.co/datasets/trl-lib/ultrafeedback_binarized/embed/viewer/default/train?row=0"
  frameborder="0"
  width="100%"
  height="560px"
></iframe>

<Tip>

High-quality preference datasets are crucial for successful DPO training. The preferences should be clear, consistent, and aligned with your target use case. Check out the [HuggingFace preference datasets collection](https://huggingface.co/collections/argilla/preference-datasets-for-dpo-656f0ce6a00ad2dc33069478) for examples.

</Tip>



## Implementation with TRL

The [TRL (Transformers Reinforcement Learning)](https://huggingface.co/docs/trl) library makes DPO implementation straightforward:

```python
from trl import DPOConfig, DPOTrainer
from transformers import AutoModelForCausalLM, AutoTokenizer
from datasets import load_dataset

# Load model and tokenizer
model = AutoModelForCausalLM.from_pretrained("HuggingFaceTB/SmolLM3-3B")
tokenizer = AutoTokenizer.from_pretrained("HuggingFaceTB/SmolLM3-3B")

# Configure DPO training
training_args = DPOConfig(
    beta=0.1,                    # Temperature parameter
    learning_rate=5e-7,          # Lower LR for stability
    max_prompt_length=512,       # Maximum prompt length
    max_length=1024,             # Maximum total length
    per_device_train_batch_size=4,
    gradient_accumulation_steps=4,
    num_train_epochs=1,
)

# Initialize trainer
trainer = DPOTrainer(
    model=model,
    args=training_args,
    train_dataset=preference_dataset,
    processing_class=tokenizer,
)

# Train the model
trainer.train()
```

## Expected dataset type

DPO requires a [preference dataset](https://huggingface.co/docs/trl/en/dataset_formats#preference). The `DPOTrainer` supports both [conversational](https://huggingface.co/docs/trl/en/dataset_formats#conversational) and [standard](https://huggingface.co/docs/trl/en/dataset_formats#standard) dataset formats. When provided with a conversational dataset, the trainer will automatically apply the chat template to the dataset.

Although the `DPOTrainer` supports both explicit and implicit prompts, we recommend using explicit prompts. If provided with an implicit prompt dataset, the trainer will automatically extract the prompt from the `"chosen"` and `"rejected"` columns. For more information, refer to the [preference style](dataset_formats#preference) section.

## Key Hyperparameters

| Parameter | Description | Recommendations |
|-----------|-------------|-----------------|
| **Beta (β)** | Controls the strength of preference optimization | **Range**: 0.1 to 0.5<br>**Lower values**: More conservative, closer to reference model<br>**Higher values**: Stronger preference alignment, risk of overfitting |
| **Learning Rate** | Learning rate for DPO training | **Recommendation**: Much lower than standard fine-tuning (5e-7 to 5e-6)<br>**Rationale**: Prevent catastrophic forgetting and maintain stability<br>**Adjustment**: Reduce further if training becomes unstable |
| **Dataset Size and Quality** | Requirements for preference dataset | **Minimum**: ~1,000 high-quality preference pairs for domain-specific tasks<br>**Recommended**: 10,000+ pairs for robust alignment<br>**Quality over quantity**: Better to have fewer high-quality pairs than many poor ones |

## Best Practices

### Data Quality

Data quality is crucial for successful DPO training. The preference dataset should include diverse examples covering different aspects of desired behavior. Clear annotation guidelines ensure consistent labeling of preferred and rejected responses. You can improve model performance by improving the quality of your preference dataset. For example, by filtering down larger datasets to include only high quality examples, or examples that relate to your use case.

During training, carefully monitor the loss convergence and validate performance on held-out data. The beta parameter may need adjustment to balance preference learning with maintaining the model's general capabilities. Regular evaluation on diverse prompts helps ensure the model is learning the intended preferences without overfitting.

Compare the model's outputs with the reference model to verify improvement in preference alignment. Testing on a variety of prompts, including edge cases, helps ensure robust preference learning across different scenarios.

### Training Stability

Monitor loss convergence carefully during training - the DPO loss should decrease smoothly without oscillations or erratic behavior. Regularly compare your model's outputs with the reference model to ensure you're seeing meaningful improvements in preference alignment. Use gradient clipping to prevent training instability, especially when working with higher learning rates or challenging datasets. Implement early stopping mechanisms to halt training if performance plateaus or begins to degrade, preventing overfitting and wasted computational resources.

### Evaluation

Evaluate your model's performance on a variety of prompts, including edge cases, to ensure robust preference learning across different scenarios. Compare your model's outputs with the reference model to verify improvement in preference alignment.

### Avoiding Common Pitfalls

While implementing DPO, watch for overfitting to preferences, which can cause the model to become repetitive or lose general capabilities. If this occurs, lower the beta parameter, reduce training time, or increase dataset diversity to maintain broader capabilities. Conversely, if you notice little to no improvement in alignment despite training, the preference signal may be insufficient - try increasing the beta parameter, improving dataset quality, or extending training duration.

Another common issue is distribution shift, where the model performs well on the training domain but poorly generalizes to new scenarios. To avoid this, ensure your preference dataset covers target use cases comprehensively and includes diverse examples that represent real-world applications. The goal is to achieve robust preference learning that maintains the model's utility across different contexts.

## Next Steps

Ready to implement DPO with SmolLM3? The [hands-on notebook](4) will guide you through:
- Loading and preparing preference datasets
- Configuring DPO training with optimal hyperparameters
- Training SmolLM3 with your preference data
- Evaluating alignment quality and model performance
- Deploying your aligned model

After mastering DPO, explore advanced techniques in the [advanced DPO methods](3) section.

Commit message:

Update DPO section in unit 3 to enhance mathematical clarity and improve formatting of hyperparameters and next steps.

units/en/unit3/2.md, after:

# Direct Preference Optimization (DPO)

Direct Preference Optimization (DPO) revolutionizes preference alignment by providing a simpler, more stable alternative to Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF). Instead of training separate reward models and using complex reinforcement learning algorithms, DPO directly optimizes language models using human preference data.

## Understanding DPO

![dpo diagram](https://github.com/huggingface/trl/assets/49240599/9150fac6-3d88-4ca2-8ec6-2a6f3473216d)

Traditional RLHF approaches require multiple components and training stages. As the diagram shows, it involves:
- Training a reward model to predict human preferences based on preferred and rejected responses.
- Using reinforcement learning algorithms like PPO to optimize the policy against the reward model.

DPO simplifies this process dramatically by skipping the reward model and using a binary cross-entropy loss to directly optimize the language model.
- First, training a SFT model to follow instructions.
- Then, training a DPO model to directly optimize the language model using preference data itself.

<Tip>

DPO has proven so effective that it's been used to train production models like Meta's Llama series and many other state-of-the-art language models.

</Tip>

## How DPO Works

DPO recasts preference alignment as a classification problem. Given a prompt and two responses (one preferred, one rejected), DPO trains the model to increase the likelihood of the preferred response while decreasing the likelihood of the rejected response.

### Training Process

The DPO process requires supervised fine-tuning (SFT) to adapt the model to the target domain. This creates a foundation for preference learning by training on standard instruction-following datasets. The model learns basic task completion while maintaining its general capabilities.

Next comes preference learning, where the model is trained on pairs of outputs - one preferred and one non-preferred. The preference pairs help the model understand which responses better align with human values and expectations.

The core innovation of DPO lies in its direct optimization approach. Rather than training a separate reward model, DPO uses a binary cross-entropy loss to directly update the model weights based on preference data. This streamlined process makes training more stable and efficient while achieving comparable or better results than traditional RLHF.

### The DPO Loss Function

The core innovation of DPO lies in its loss function, which directly optimizes the policy (language model) using preference data:

$$L_{DPO} = -\mathbb{E}_{(\pi,r)\sim D} \left[\log \sigma\left(\beta \log \frac{\pi_\theta(y_w|x)}{\pi_{ref}(y_w|x)} - \beta \log \frac{\pi_\theta(y_l|x)}{\pi_{ref}(y_l|x)}\right)\right]$$

Where:
- `π_θ` is the model being trained
- `π_ref` is the reference model (usually the SFT model)
- `y_w` is the preferred (winning) response
- `y_l` is the rejected (losing) response
- `β` is a temperature parameter controlling optimization strength
- `σ` is the sigmoid function

## DPO Dataset Format

DPO training requires preference datasets where each example contains:

| Field | Description | Example |
|-------|-------------|---------|
| `prompt` | The input prompt or question | "Explain quantum computing in simple terms" |
| `chosen` | The preferred response | "Quantum computing uses quantum mechanics principles..." |
| `rejected` | The less preferred response | "Quantum computing is very complex and hard to understand..." |

The dataset can also include additional features to enhance training quality. It can include system prompts that provide instructions for the model's behavior. It can also incorporate multi-turn conversations that involve complex dialogues with preference annotations. Finally, it can contain metadata providing additional context like preference strength or annotator agreement.

We can see an example of a DPO dataset below:

<iframe
  src="https://huggingface.co/datasets/trl-lib/ultrafeedback_binarized/embed/viewer/default/train?row=0"
  frameborder="0"
  width="100%"
  height="560px"
></iframe>

<Tip>

High-quality preference datasets are crucial for successful DPO training. The preferences should be clear, consistent, and aligned with your target use case. Check out the [HuggingFace preference datasets collection](https://huggingface.co/collections/argilla/preference-datasets-for-dpo-656f0ce6a00ad2dc33069478) for examples.

</Tip>



## Implementation with TRL

The [TRL (Transformers Reinforcement Learning)](https://huggingface.co/docs/trl) library makes DPO implementation straightforward:

```python
from trl import DPOConfig, DPOTrainer
from transformers import AutoModelForCausalLM, AutoTokenizer
from datasets import load_dataset

# Load model and tokenizer
model = AutoModelForCausalLM.from_pretrained("HuggingFaceTB/SmolLM3-3B")
tokenizer = AutoTokenizer.from_pretrained("HuggingFaceTB/SmolLM3-3B")

# Configure DPO training
training_args = DPOConfig(
    beta=0.1,                    # Temperature parameter
    learning_rate=5e-7,          # Lower LR for stability
    max_prompt_length=512,       # Maximum prompt length
    max_length=1024,             # Maximum total length
    per_device_train_batch_size=4,
    gradient_accumulation_steps=4,
    num_train_epochs=1,
)

# Initialize trainer
trainer = DPOTrainer(
    model=model,
    args=training_args,
    train_dataset=preference_dataset,
    processing_class=tokenizer,
)

# Train the model
trainer.train()
```

## Expected dataset type

DPO requires a [preference dataset](https://huggingface.co/docs/trl/en/dataset_formats#preference). The `DPOTrainer` supports both [conversational](https://huggingface.co/docs/trl/en/dataset_formats#conversational) and [standard](https://huggingface.co/docs/trl/en/dataset_formats#standard) dataset formats. When provided with a conversational dataset, the trainer will automatically apply the chat template to the dataset.

Although the `DPOTrainer` supports both explicit and implicit prompts, we recommend using explicit prompts. If provided with an implicit prompt dataset, the trainer will automatically extract the prompt from the `"chosen"` and `"rejected"` columns. For more information, refer to the [preference style](dataset_formats#preference) section.

Although the `DPOTrainer` supports both explicit and implicit prompts, we recommend using explicit prompts. If provided with an implicit prompt dataset, the trainer will automatically extract the prompt from the `"chosen"` and `"rejected"` columns. For more information, refer to the [preference style](https://huggingface.co/docs/trl/en/dataset_formats#preference) section.

| Parameter | Description | Recommendations |
|-----------|-------------|-----------------|
| **Beta (β)** | Controls the strength of preference optimization | **Range**: 0.1 to 0.5<br>**Lower values**: More conservative, closer to reference model<br>**Higher values**: Stronger preference alignment, risk of overfitting |
| **Learning Rate** | Learning rate for DPO training | **Recommendation**: Much lower than standard fine-tuning (5e-7 to 5e-6)<br>**Rationale**: Prevent catastrophic forgetting and maintain stability<br>**Adjustment**: Reduce further if training becomes unstable |
| **Dataset Size and Quality** | Requirements for preference dataset | **Minimum**: ~1,000 high-quality preference pairs for domain-specific tasks<br>**Recommended**: 10,000+ pairs for robust alignment<br>**Quality over quantity**: Better to have fewer high-quality pairs than many poor ones |

## Best Practices

### Data Quality

Data quality is crucial for successful DPO training. The preference dataset should include diverse examples covering different aspects of desired behavior. Clear annotation guidelines ensure consistent labeling of preferred and rejected responses. You can improve model performance by improving the quality of your preference dataset. For example, by filtering down larger datasets to include only high quality examples, or examples that relate to your use case.

During training, carefully monitor the loss convergence and validate performance on held-out data. The beta parameter may need adjustment to balance preference learning with maintaining the model's general capabilities. Regular evaluation on diverse prompts helps ensure the model is learning the intended preferences without overfitting.

Compare the model's outputs with the reference model to verify improvement in preference alignment. Testing on a variety of prompts, including edge cases, helps ensure robust preference learning across different scenarios.

### Training Stability

Monitor loss convergence carefully during training - the DPO loss should decrease smoothly without oscillations or erratic behavior. Regularly compare your model's outputs with the reference model to ensure you're seeing meaningful improvements in preference alignment. Use gradient clipping to prevent training instability, especially when working with higher learning rates or challenging datasets. Implement early stopping mechanisms to halt training if performance plateaus or begins to degrade, preventing overfitting and wasted computational resources.

### Evaluation

Evaluate your model's performance on a variety of prompts, including edge cases, to ensure robust preference learning across different scenarios. Compare your model's outputs with the reference model to verify improvement in preference alignment.

### Avoiding Common Pitfalls

While implementing DPO, watch for overfitting to preferences, which can cause the model to become repetitive or lose general capabilities. If this occurs, lower the beta parameter, reduce training time, or increase dataset diversity to maintain broader capabilities. Conversely, if you notice little to no improvement in alignment despite training, the preference signal may be insufficient - try increasing the beta parameter, improving dataset quality, or extending training duration.

Another common issue is distribution shift, where the model performs well on the training domain but poorly generalizes to new scenarios. To avoid this, ensure your preference dataset covers target use cases comprehensively and includes diverse examples that represent real-world applications. The goal is to achieve robust preference learning that maintains the model's utility across different contexts.

## Next Steps

- Training SmolLM3 with your preference data
- Evaluating alignment quality and model performance
- Deploying your aligned model

After mastering DPO, explore advanced techniques in the [advanced DPO methods](3) section.
