# Submission! 

It's time to submit your project! This year the smol course will use a leaderboard based submission. Here's the plan:

1. Read the written guide for the chapter ✅
2. Train a model using what you learned in the chapter.
3. Push the model to the Hugging Face Hub.
4. Evaluate the model using `hf jobs`.
5. Open a pull request on the leaderboard.

On this page we will go through each step.

## Push the model to the Hugging Face Hub

So let's say you trained a model using `hf jobs`, then 

hf jobs uv run \
    --flavor a100-large \
    --secrets HF_TOKEN \
    "trl/scripts/sft.py" \
    ...
    --push_to_hub # this will push the model to the Hugging Face Hub

Your trained model will be available at `your-username/your-model-name`.

## Evaluate the model using `hf jobs`

Now, we will need to evaluate the model. We will use `hf jobs` to evaluate the model as well and combine it with `openbench`.

```sh
export HF_TOKEN=<your-huggingface-token>

hf jobs uv run \
--flavor a100-large \ # define machine size
--with openbench --with vllm --with 'transformers<4.54.0' \ # install dependencies
bench eval mmlu --model vllm/<your-username>/your-model-name \ # define model repo
--hub-repo <your-username>/<your-model-name>-chapter-1 # define output dataset
```

This command will evaluate the model using `openbench` and `vllm` and save the results to the Hugging Face Hub in the dataset repo that you defined. 

## Open a pull request on the leaderboard space

You are now ready to submit your model to the leaderboard!  You need to do two things:

1. add your model's results to `submissions.json`
2. share you evaluation command in the PR text.

### 1. add your model's results to `submissions.json`

Open a pull request on the [leaderboard space](https://huggingface.co/spaces/smol-course/leaderboard/edit/main/submissions.json) to submit your model.

```json
{
    "submissions": [

        ... # existing submissions
        
        {
            "username": "<your-username>",
            "model_name": "<your-model-name>",
            "chapter": "1",
            "submission_date": "<your-submission-date>",
            "results-dataset": "<your-results-dataset>"
        }
    ]
}
```

### 2. share you evaluation command in the PR text.

Within the PR text, share you evaluation command. For example:

```
hf jobs uv run ...
```

This will help us to reproduce your model evaluation and add it to the leaderboard.

### 3. wait for the PR to be merged

Once the PR is merged, your model will be added to the leaderboard!

You can check the leaderboard [here](https://huggingface.co/spaces/smol-course/leaderboard).